Bariatric surgery and dementia
Introduction
The prevalence of obesity is an increasing problem worldwide1. Obesity is associated with insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, chronic low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress, all known to augment several metabolic conditions and weight loss following bariatric surgery (BS) has well-documented effects on the majority of the obesity-related conditions, including type 2 diabetes, sleep apnea, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and reduced mortality.3-6[a] 
Dementia is a syndrome rather than as one specific disease, often defined as any decline in cognition significant enough to interfere with daily functioning. The background for developing dementia is multiple, including neurologic, neuropsychiatric, and medical conditions, with Alzheimer disease being the most prevalent.[b] Chronic fragmented sleep, low-grade systemic inflammation, and oxidative stress may increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease by disrupting glymphatic circulation, reducing the egress of toxic metabolites and accelerating accumulation of neuropathologic proteins in the brain, including amyloid-ß plaques and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles.9,10 Overweight and obesity, as drivers of  insulin resistance, low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress has been reported to be associated with the risk of developing dementia, although causality has not yet been established.7,8
Recent research offers mixed findings on the cognitive outcomes following BS, and only few studies have examined the long-term association between BS and dementia. BS may reduce the risk of both mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia.11 Conversely, others have reported associations between BS and an increased incidence of Alzheimer’s disease12. Several mechanisms suggest that BS may reduce the risk of dementia. Weight loss and metabolic improvements, including reduced insulin resistance and enhanced glycemic control, reduced neuroinflammation, and favorable changes in appetite-regulating hormones such as GLP-1, ghrelin, leptin, and adiponectin, may mitigate neurodegeneration, also independent of the degree of weight loss.11 Combined with these changes, the weight loss-induced attenuation of low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress suggests that BS may decrease the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease[c]. Conversely, BS may also introduce risk factors for cognitive decline. Postoperative vitamin B deficiencies, which are linked to impaired neurotransmitter synthesis, may increase the risk of dementia. In addition, substantial weight loss following BS is associated with decreased circulating estrogen levels, which have been linked with an increased risk of dementia, potentially through loss of neuroprotective effects[d].12 Thus, the overall association between BS and cognitive outcomes may reflect a complex balance between beneficial metabolic improvements and adverse nutritional and hormonal alterations.
Aim
Our aim was to examine the association between BS and all-cause dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia. The analyses include the effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and sleeve gastrectomy (SG), both separately or collectively, as RYGB and SG differ substantially in their metabolic and nutritional consequences. By comparing patients undergoing BS to both a cohort obtained from the general population cohort and an obesity-specific cohort, this study has the ability to disentangle the potential effect of surgery from the underlying risk conferred by obesity per se.


Methods
Design and setting
We will conduct a retrospective cohort study based on nationwide population-based register data. The Danish health care system is nationwide, accessible to everyone, and tax-funded, making it a valuable tool for epidemiological research.13 
After individual evaluation, the Danish state offers free-of-charge BS to patients fulfilling specific criteria (Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥ 40 kg/m2 or BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2 in combination with obesity-related comorbidity).14 Approximately 50% of patients treated with BS in Denmark have their surgery performed at private hospitals13 with self-payment. Our study encompasses both the tax-funded and self-paid procedures. All Danish clinics and hospitals performing BS, both private and public, must report all surgeries to the Danish quality registry for treatment of severe obesity (DBSO).13 
We utilized data from both the Danish Civil Registration System (CRS),15[e] the Danish National Patient Registry (DNPR),16 the Danish National Prescription Database (DNPD),17 the Danish Central Psychiatric Research Registry DCPRR,18 and the Danish Database for Severe Obesity[f] (DBSO).13 CRS assigns a unique civil personal registration number (CPR number) to each resident, either at birth or upon immigration, enabling the linking of health care registers for each individual. The CRS contains updated information on age, sex, date of birth, migration, and vital status from 1968.19 Since 1995, data from all non-psychiatric contacts in Danish hospitals (inpatient, outpatient clinic, and emergency room), including surgical procedures, coded according to the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition (ICD-10), have been included in the DNPR.16 DNPD has collected data on redeemed prescriptions since 1994.17 The DCPRR contains information on all contacts with psychiatric hospitals and clinics in Denmark since 1970.18 
In the DBSO, information on patients treated with BS in Denmark dates back to 2008, with mandatory registration since 2010. DBSO contains information on pre-, peri- and postoperative anthropometric measures, complications, and diagnosis codes. The Integrated Database for Labour Market Research (IDLMR)holds yearly updated information on the highest level of education achieved and yearly gross income for each citizen since 1980.20


Bariatric surgery cohort
We included all patients treated with BS in Denmark between January 1, 2010, and December 31, 2024[g], who had 5 years of lookback. We retrieved information on surgical codes for RYGB (KJDF10/11) and SG (KJDF40/41/96/97) from DNPR.[h] Subsequently, the cohort was divided into two sub-cohorts: a SG cohort and a RYGB cohort. The index date was defined as the date of BS. [i]
The following exclusion criteria[j] were applied in sequence:
1. Revision surgery 
2. Death within 30 days of surgery
3. A diagnoses of dementia (ICD-10: F00–F03, G30–G31) recorded in the DNPR or DCPRR at any time before the index date
4. Prescription of antidementia medication (ATC N06D) recorded in the DNPD before the index date
5. Fewer than five years of Danish registry history before the index date. This to ensure sufficient data for baseline comorbidity ascertainment. 
Comparison cohorts
We retrieved two comparison cohorts from CRS and DNPR. 
First, a general population cohort[k] matched on age, sex and index date wherein each BS patient was matched with 25 comparisons (1:25). Exclusion criteria 3-5 also applied to the comparison cohorts. 
Second, a cohort with overweight/obesity (BMI>25 kg/m2 based on IDC-10 diagnosis codes (E66)21) prior to index date, was matched on age, sex and index date wherein each BS patient was matched with 5 comparisons (1:5).[l]
Comparators who subsequently underwent BS during follow-up contributed unexposed person-time from the index date until the date of their bariatric procedure, at which point they were censored.
GLP-1 receptor agonist (ATC A10BJ) use by obesity comparators was not an exclusion criterion [m]and was not used as a censoring event in the main analysis. GLP-1 receptor agonists have become a major obesity treatment from approximately 2021 onwards; excluding or censoring their users in the main analysis would create calendar-period imbalance and disproportionately reduce comparator pool size in recent years. The potential impact of GLP-1 RA use in the obesity comparator is addressed in a pre-specified sensitivity analysis (see Sensitivity Analyses).
Dementia[n]
The primary outcome will be diagnosis of incident all-cause dementia (ICD-10: F00, F01, F02, F03, G30, G31). The secondary outcome will be Alzheimer’s disease (ICD-10: F00 or G30) and vascular dementia (ICD-10: F01). All-cause dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia will all be defined on the basis of inpatient and outpatient diagnostic codes22 from the DNPR and the DCPRR.18 The positive predictive value of the coding of all‐cause dementia in the DNPR and DCPRR is 86%, and that of Alzheimer's disease is 81%.23 Positive predictive values for coding of vascular dementia and other dementia subtypes are lower, and the diagnostic sensitivity of registry diagnoses of dementia or Alzheimer’s disease is unknown.23




Covariates
We retrieved data on baseline comorbidities from the DNPR and the DNPD, according to the Nordic Multimorbidity Index (NMI)24 and calculated the NMI score for all included individuals[o]. Baseline comorbidity data will be collected five years prior to the index date until the index date and will be ascertained through a combination of ICD-10 diagnosis codes and data pertaining to medication utilization retrieved from DNPD[p].


Socioeconomic position (SEP) was assessed using three dimensions from the IDLMR, consistent with the SEPLINE framework for Danish register epidemiology (REF[q]). Education was defined as the highest attained qualification recorded in the year prior to index date (categories: short, medium, long, unknown). Household income was defined as the three-year average equivalised disposable household income in the three years preceding surgery, assigned to quintiles based on population-level cutpoints stratified by sex and five-year age group[r]. Occupation was classified in the year before surgery (categories: working, unemployed, outside workforce, retired, student, unknown). Calendar period of surgery was included as a covariate in three periods (2010–2014, 2015–2019, 2020–2024)[s] to account for changes in surgical practice and patient selection over time.


Statistical analyses
We followed all individuals from index date until outcome, death, emigration, censoring due to a comparator undergoing BS or December 31, 2025, whichever came first. 


We computed incidence rates (IR) of the first diagnosis code for all-cause dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia, per 100 person-years with 95% confidence intervals for the BS cohort and the two comparison cohorts. 


We created cumulative incidence plots for dementia, considering death as a competing risk. To estimate the association between BS and the first diagnosis code of all-cause dementia, Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia, we will use a Cox proportional hazards regression to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) with 95% confidence interval (CI). We will use the two comparison cohorts as the references and adjust for baseline comorbidities. One-year and five-year landmark IRs and HRs were computed to characterise early and late post-surgical risk periods. 


Both IR and HR analyses were conducted for the surgery cohort in total and for the RYGB and SG subcohorts separately. Additionally, we performed stratified HR analyses for sex (male/female), age (<50/ ≥50[t]), and baseline diabetes status using[u] the combined surgery cohort. In the HR analyses, we will compare the BS patients with their respective matched controls.


We assessed whether the proportional hazards assumption is met, using visual inspection of log-log plots and Schoenfeld residuals. Since the hazards in the cohorts were expected to be non-proportional across the full follow-up period, the HRs calculated was weighted averages of time-varying hazard rate ratios25. 
Model 1 is unadjusted, model 2 adjusts for age (continous) and sex and model 3 adjusts for age, sex, NMI score, SEP and calender period of surgery.


Sensitivity analyses - suggestions
* Lag time analysis: exclude early events within the first 12 months after surgery (vil forvente at demensrisiko her er størst i sammenligningskohorterne, da BS patienterne jo til dels er screenet for demens for at være eligible for BS)
* Negative control outcome/outcome with no expected biologically plausible causal pathway from BS to dementia: cataract[v] (ICD-10: H25-H26) to assess the presence of residual confounding or differential surveillance. 
* Analyse uden censoring af sammenligningskohorte hvis de får BS
* Censoring obesity comparators if they get a perscription for GLP1 receptor agonists during follow-up. 


All analyses were performed in R.


Issues to discuss:
* Exclusion af revision surgery?
* Exclusion af død inden for 30 dage efter kirurgi?
* Matching: på sex og age, men også på index date +- XX / birth year window?
* Censoring hvis comparator får BS?
* Censoring (i sensitivitetsanalyse) af GLP1 recept.
* Obesity cohort også matches på comorbiditet/eligibilitet til BS[w]?
* Hvor lang tid før index date med E66 ligge? Forventning om kronisk tilstand.
* NMI - excludere demens i beregning?
* Demensmedicin med i outcome (formentlig ikke meget bedre sensitivitet)
* Socioøkonomi: ligger der beregning/kode?
* Årstal for inklusion (nu 2010-2024)  - sample size >< minimal follow-up tid? Obs completeness fra 2010-2012. 
* Age cutoff for subanalysis, nu: >/<50 år - ændre? 
* Fine-Grey som alternativ? Fuld kumulativ incidens uden død som competing risk (om BS reducerer den absolutte populationsbyrde fra demens - patienter med BS forventet bedre overlevelse?)
* Hvem er den primære sammenligningskohorte? Generel population eller overvægt.
* Multiple comparisions, e.g. bonferroni. Alle analyser er pre-specified og ikke data driven, men stadig. 
* Explorative secondary analysis: Subanalyse med baseline BMI stratification i RYGB vs SG - vurdere effect modification?
* Stratificere på public >< private hospital - hvis det data findes?


References
1.        Chooi YC, Ding C, Magkos F. The epidemiology of obesity. Metabolism 2019; 92: 6-10.
2.        Angrisani L, Santonicola A, Iovino P, et al. Bariatric Surgery and Endoluminal Procedures: IFSO Worldwide Survey 2014. Obes Surg 2017; 27(9): 2279-89.
3.        Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al. Bariatric Surgery versus Intensive Medical Therapy for Diabetes - 5-Year Outcomes. N Engl J Med 2017; 376(7): 641-51.
4.        Madsen LR, Baggesen LM, Richelsen B, Thomsen RW. Effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery on diabetes remission and complications in individuals with type 2 diabetes: a Danish population-based matched cohort study. Diabetologia 2019; 62(4): 611-20.
5.        Adams TD, Davidson LE, Litwin SE, et al. Weight and Metabolic Outcomes 12 Years after Gastric Bypass. N Engl J Med 2017; 377(12): 1143-55.
6.        Lent MR, Benotti PN, Mirshahi T, et al. All-Cause and Specific-Cause Mortality Risk After Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass in Patients With and Without Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2017; 40(10): 1379-85.
7.        Floud S, Simpson RF, Balkwill A, et al. Body mass index, diet, physical inactivity, and the incidence of dementia in 1 million UK women. Neurology 2020; 94(2): e123-e32.
8.        Kivimäki M, Luukkonen R, Batty GD, et al. Body mass index and risk of dementia: Analysis of individual-level data from 1.3 million individuals. Alzheimers Dement 2018; 14(5): 601-9.
9.        Liguori C, Mercuri NB, Izzi F, et al. Obstructive Sleep Apnea is Associated With Early but Possibly Modifiable Alzheimer's Disease Biomarkers Changes. Sleep 2017; 40(5).
10.        Bubu OM, Andrade AG, Umasabor-Bubu OQ, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea, cognition and Alzheimer's disease: A systematic review integrating three decades of multidisciplinary research. Sleep Med Rev 2020; 50: 101250.
11.        Chen Y, Feng Y, Zhang X, et al. Bariatric Surgery Is Associated With Reduced Incidence of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer Disease and Related Dementias: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Ann Surg Open 2025; 6(1): e541.
12.        Kim J, Kelley J, Kleinschmit K, Richards N, Adams T. Development of dementia in patients who underwent bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc 2023; 37(5): 3507-21.
13.        Winckelmann LA, Gribsholt SB, Madsen LR, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass versus sleeve gastrectomy: nationwide data from the Danish quality registry for treatment of severe obesity. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2022; 18(4): 511-9.
14.        Selskab DE. Kirurgisk behandling af svær overvægt. 2020. https://endocrinology.dk/nbv/andre-endokrinologiske-sygdomme/fedmekirurgi/ (accessed 11.01 2021).
15.        Schmidt M, Pedersen L, Sorensen HT. The Danish Civil Registration System as a tool in epidemiology. Eur J Epidemiol 2014; 29(8): 541-9.
16.        Schmidt M, Schmidt SA, Sandegaard JL, Ehrenstein V, Pedersen L, Sorensen HT. The Danish National Patient Registry: a review of content, data quality, and research potential. Clin Epidemiol 2015; 7: 449-90.
17.        Johannesdottir SA, Horvath-Puho E, Ehrenstein V, Schmidt M, Pedersen L, Sorensen HT. Existing data sources for clinical epidemiology: The Danish National Database of Reimbursed Prescriptions. Clin Epidemiol 2012; 4: 303-13.
18.        Mors O, Perto GP, Mortensen PB. The Danish Psychiatric Central Research Register. Scand J Public Health 2011; 39(7 Suppl): 54-7.
19.        Schmidt M SS, Adelborg K, et al. The Danish Healthcare System and Epidemiological Research: From healthcare contacts to database records. Clin Epidemiol 2019.
20.        Petersson F, Baadsgaard M, Thygesen LC. Danish registers on personal labour market affiliation. Scand J Public Health 2011; 39(7 Suppl): 95-8.
21.        Gribsholt SB, Pedersen L, Richelsen B, Thomsen RW. Validity of ICD-10 diagnoses of overweight and obesity in Danish hospitals. Clin Epidemiol 2019; 11: 845-54.
22.        Sundboll J, Horvath-Puho E, Adelborg K, et al. Higher Risk of Vascular Dementia in Myocardial Infarction Survivors. Circulation 2018; 137(6): 567-77.
23.        Phung TK, Andersen BB, Hogh P, Kessing LV, Mortensen PB, Waldemar G. Validity of dementia diagnoses in the Danish hospital registers. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 2007; 24(3): 220-8.
24.        Kristensen KB, Lund LC, Jensen PB, et al. Development and Validation of a Nordic Multimorbidity Index Based on Hospital Diagnoses and Filled Prescriptions. Clin Epidemiol 2022; 14: 567-79.
25.        Stensrud MJ, Hernán MA. Why Test for Proportional Hazards? Jama 2020; 323(14): 1401-2.
________________


Formål (fra ansøgning)
Formålet med dette studie er at undersøge, om bariatrisk kirurgi (Roux‑en‑Y gastric bypass og sleeve gastrectomy) er associeret med risikoen for all‑cause demens, Alzheimer’s sygdom og vaskulær demens sammenlignet med både den generelle befolkning og en kohorte med overvægt/fedme. Derudover har studiet til formål at vurdere, hvordan eventuelle risikoforskelle varierer efter kirurgitype, alder, køn og baseline diabetesstatus.


Aim
Sammenhæng mellem bariatrisk kirurgi og demens:
Hvilken sammenhæng er der mellem bariatrisk kirurgi (RYGB og SG) og risikoen for all‑cause demens, Alzheimer’s sygdom og vaskulær demens sammenlignet med både den generelle befolkning og en matched kohorte med overvægt?
Variation efter kirurgitype og patientkarakteristika:
Adskiller sammenhængen mellem bariatrisk kirurgi og demens sig mellem RYGB og SG, og hvordan varierer associationerne efter alder, køn og baseline diabetesstatus?
Betydningen af komorbiditet og metaboliske forhold:
I hvor høj grad forklares eventuelle risikoforskelle af baseline‑komorbiditeter og metaboliske faktorer, som bariatrisk kirurgi kan påvirke?
Tidsafhængige risikomønstre:
Hvordan udvikler sammenhængen mellem bariatrisk kirurgi demens sig over tid efter kirurgi (1 år vs. 5 år), og er den anderledes end hos de matchede kontrolkohorter?




[a]Har tilføjet en ref. med fokus på SG, da andre primært har RYGB som modalitet - https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41410827/
[b]Ref. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29425707/
[c]Ref?
[d]kilde: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20535591/
[e]{Schmidt, 2019 #22}
[f]Må jeg oversætte sådan?
[g]Så bliver det svært at nå at udvikle demens, og de vil i hvert fald kun kunne indgå i 1 års analysen.
[h]Det er en del af datasættet fra DBSO, skal vi dobbelttjekke med koder fra DNPR?
[i]Skal vi tydeliggøre at det kun er primære operationer / ekskluderer vi reoperationer?
[j]Til diskussion
[k]Jeg har kun læst de to studier Jens i sin tid sendte, men de sammenligner begge kun med kontrolpersoner med obesity, det ku evt fremhæves. Selvom jeg ikke tænker det er vores primære spørgsmål - måske de to skulle byttes om i rækkefølge?
[l]Stategi for hvis kontrolpopulation senere får BS? Censurerer vi dem så?
[m]discuss
[n]Skal det tydeliggøres at vi henter demensdiagnoser fra både DNPR og DCPRR?
[o]In the present study, a modified NMI score was used that excludes the two dementia-related NMI predictors — hospital-coded dementia diagnoses (ICD-10 F00–G30, NMI weight = 9) and dispensed antidementia medications (ATC N06D, NMI weight = 11) — to avoid circular adjustment, as these predictors directly overlap with the study outcome and the pre-index exclusion criteria.


Skal vi gøre dette? demens er jo exclusionscriteria, så måske bare gøre opmærksom på det?
[p]kun 6 month window for medicin
[q]https://www.dovepress.com/sepline-socioeconomic-position-in-epidemiological-researcha-national-g-peer-reviewed-fulltext-article-CLEP
[r]Skal vi selv beregne disse tal eller findes de (har ledt på DST)? Evt andres kode?
[s]Diskuter, især om vi skal have med helt til 2024 - næsten ingen followup time + diabetes status har vi kun indtil 2022.
[t]Ældre? Tænker der er ret få cases under 50 år? Vi er selvfølgelig begrænset af relativt kort follow-up (outcome taget i betragtning) med inklusion fra 2010 og frem.
[u]Sammenligner vi så også kun med comparison cohort members med/uden baseline diabetes?
[v]Uden Diabetic cataract (ICD-10 H28)
[w]Tidligere kommentar fra Jens: Det er primært kirurgiske forhold som er absolutte kontraindikationer.